Purpose: 

At 1PM on a Wednesday, Professor Cordell’s book lab students lined up out the Rare Books and Manuscripts Library’s reading room like kids for an ice cream truck. We bibliophiles couldn’t wait to roam the reading room and consume these objects on our own. I was drawn from the door to the opposite corner where the so called Eliot Indian bible rested in its cradle. I’m interested in how states have used the book (the object, its production, and consumption) in state craft, so Professor Coker’s statement “this bible started a war, but no one could read it” made it especially compelling. 

I carefully flipped through its pages and was struck by the red ruling lining each margin, column, heading, subheading, capital, and ornament. This was strange. I’d never seen a printed book ruled like that, so I asked Professor Coker if she had any idea why the printer decided to include lining. She hypothesized the owner of the bible added the ruling after acquiring it because none of the other copies she had seen had red ruling. Here was a book that no one could read, yet someone decided to painstakingly added red ruling to every page. Why did they bother? That question might well be beyond what any book historian could answer, and it’s certainly a bigger question than I can answer in this lab report. But, whatever the reason, they did so because red ruling communicated some kind of code through which their copy operated. In the rest of this lab report, I compare UIUC’s copy of the bible to that of Brown University and to another book in RBML’s collection with ruling, Edwin Tilney’s The Topographicall Descriptions, to decode the message the red ruling conveys.

Observation: 


UIUC’s copy vs. Brown’s copy: 
-	  UIUC’s title page is in English, Brown’s is in Eliot’s prescribed “Wampanoag” 
-	  Both UIUC’s and Brown’s copies were printed in Cambridge in 1663, although the UIUC copy has the date written in roman numerals     with “1663” written into it by hand. The Brown copy has its date in Arabic numerals. 
-	  John Eliot’s name is printed in large type (only slightly smaller than that in which the printer rendered “GOD”) in Brown’s     
    copy. His name is missing on the UIUC version. In its place, the printer wrote “INDIAN LANGUAGE.” 
-	  UIUC’s copy contains an entire dedication page written in English “To the high and mighty prince Charles the second” while  
    Brown’s copy lacks a dedication. 
-	  Provenance of UIUC’s copy: According to John Pilling and Wilberforce Eams’ 1891 bibliography, someone adding the red ruling to 
    the manuscript before the book was bound. Furthermore, the binding of this copy is like that of the others, suggesting someone  
    involved in the books’ initial production added the ruling (Pilling and Eams 144). Sometime between its printing and binding in 
    Cambridge in 1663 and 1812, the bible was in England. How it got back into the US isn’t known. However, once it was returned to
    the US, a ruler of the Nihantic tribe in Lyme, Connecticut became its owner. In 1812, the ruler “gave” the bible to John Lyon 
    Gardiner. Gardiner gave the book to a public library in Connecticut in 1923. In 1974, U of I acquired it. 
-	  Based on this information I have a hypothesis. Perhaps, the printers created two versions of the bible- 1 to be distributed to 
    the Wampanoag people and 1 to be sent back to England. The missionaries may have put red ruling around the borders of the bibles     sent to England. – so what’s with the ruling? What does it tell us? Was it associated with royalty? 
 UIUC’s copy vs. Tilney’s Topographicall Features 
-	  Limited vs. large circulation:
      o	Tilney’s book is a one-of-a-kind manuscript made for Queen Elizabeth I’s court. It’s a reference book—not meant to be read 
         from start to finish 
      o	 The bible is an evangelizing technology (not a very successful one, but that’s the intention) – this means the idea is to           create multiple copies of the same object to get converts. 
-	  Print vs. manuscript
      o	Manuscript allows Tilney’s readers to emend his work and add additions to it- it also is less expensive to create in    
        manuscript since there was just 1 copy
      o	Print let the missionaries create multiple copies of the same text
-	ruling- ruling had to be done by hand in both cases
      o	For Tilney, it’s practical- it helps the scribe keep their letters in readable space
      o	In the UIUC bible it’s decorative- Type is not laid out on paper, so the ruling serves no practical purpose. It is evocative 
        of manuscript culture, a time when books were created for limited aristocratic audiences. This would seem counterintuitive 
        to the missionary’s project, i.e. adding ruling was time intensive, it aligned the bible with a text of limited distribution 
        for a closed audience when the bible was supposed to be an evangelizing technology, and also the ruling would not have meant 
        much to Wampanoag readers/viewers. 


Hypothesis:  

The Eliot Indian bible was devised as a brutal tool of settler colonization. Linc Kesler shows that settler colonists used written records to impose order and rule on Indigenous communities while denying the existence of oral, non-written Indigenous histories and cultures. Eliot’s decision to render the Wampanoag language in print was quite literally an attempt to impose a European medium and, with it, order on Wampanoag communication to control it. 
Yet “when we look beyond the pages towards the material evidence of [its] production and use,” as Hannah Alpert-Abrams urges us, we find the small bibliographic differences in two copies of the bible reveal different axes on which the colonial message operated. 
(Alpert-Abrams).

	The differences between the paratext in UIUC’s and Brown’s copies of the bible may be the result of material constraints. The UIUC bible’s English title and dedication pages contrast with Brown’s copy—which has a “Wampanoag” title page and no dedication. The UIUC copy’s paratext is intended for an English reader whereas that of Brown’s seems to be for an imagined Wampanoag reader. Perhaps, the printers probably chose to omit title pages and dedications in different languages because “paper was usually the responsibility of the person paying for the book to be printed…[and] given the sheer volume of paper needed to print a book, it was easily the most expensive element of making one—nearly half the cost” (Werner). The settler printers may have sent versions of the bible missing “Wampanoag” title pages to show their patrons their progress and ask for more money for paper. Additionally, the missing English in Brown’s copy may have been an economic decision to save paper by not printing the English version which a Wampanoag reader could not understand or did not need to understand because they could read it in Eliot’s invented “Wampanoag.” This suggests the two bibles had two distinct audiences: Wampanoag people and British colonial administrators. 
  
	The choice to include red ruling in UIUC’s copy can be understood in its history as a settler colonial message intended for the metropole. Prior to the invention of print and widespread use of paper, books were a luxury good. Rubrication is a practice specific to manuscript culture. The choice to include bright red ruling in UIUC’s copy associates (rather loudly) it with a manuscript book—a luxury item, not unlike Tilney’s book. This anachronistic skeuomorphic design aligns the bible with older book making practices. When print was first brought to Western Europe, it existed alongside a rise in manuscript production (Borsuk 82). Further, “the earliest printed books often depended on the manuscript completion; the addition of initial letters and rubrication to mark the start of passages” (Werner). But, by 1663, the incunable period was long over. The message the red ruling sends is two pronged: 1) it associates the settlers with British aristocrats, countering the classist stereotypes with which settlers were often associated in the metropole. It is a technology of respectability. 2) It makes the book seem older which dates the settler’s claim to the land earlier, thereby naturalizing it. The red ruling is a settler colonial design choice. 
  
  In spite of being the same text, the bibles housed in Brown’s and UIUC’s libraries send two different, but related, messages, pointing to the complexity of British settler colonial state craft. 

References: 

Alpert-Abrams, Sarah. “Archaeology of a Book: Introduction.” Archaeology of a Book: An Experimental Approach to Reading Rare Books in Archival Contexts, https://scalar.usc.edu/works/advertencias/index. Accessed 29 Jan. 2022.

Borsuk, Amaranth. The Book. The MIT Press, 2018.

Kesler, Linc. “Indigenous People and the Written Word - Oxford Handbooks.” The Unfinished Books, Oxford University Press, 2021, https://www-oxfordhandbooks-com.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198830801.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780198830801-e-33.

Pilling, James Constantine, and Wilberforce Eames. Bibliography of the Algonquian Languages. Govt. Print. Off., 1891. HathiTrust, https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001178505.

Werner, Sarah. Studying Early Printed Books, 1450-1800 : A Practical Guide. 2019, https://eds-p-ebscohost-com.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/eds/ebookviewer/ebook?sid=914cdd88-9fd2-4bf0-8711-b8585560978c%40redis&ppid=Page-__-16&vid=0&format=EK.



