
Reflection:

When I walked into Fresh press, I expected to see reams of paper. Instead, I saw grass.  I’d read about Fresh Press and paper making processes, and yet I couldn’t quite wrap my brain around the material presence of the landscape. We proceeded to beat the cotton and prairie paper shreds down to pulp and pull sheets from the vat. As we transferred the sheets from the vat to the press, I found myself thinking “wow! It really looks like paper.”  Like paper. But not paper. I couldn’t fathom that the sheet pulled from the vat made of the pulp we had just beaten out of cotton and prairie grass was actual paper. It had to be paper like, paper ish, but not paper. As of writing this, I haven’t had the chance to see the two dried sheets I made. Perhaps, then, I’ll get over my mental block. For now, it’s hard for me to imagine I made anything more than a wet, slimy, 8 x 12 piece of cellulose that looked remarkably similar to a page.  
My persistent inability to connect the process of making paper to the page is symptomatic of how we think about paper in the contemporary: “a mute vehicle of text, rarely noticed except when it fails its purpose, when defects inherent to its manufacture impede the transmission and preservation of printed information” (Bidwell qtd. in Senchyne 1). As readers, we’re taught to ignore paper and material reality of information transfer. If paper is functioning as it’s supposed to, it’s invisible. Jonathan Senchyne’s work historicizes the unquestioned dichotomy we draw between material and content through investigating the paper making and meaning making processes of the rag paper era. He finds that rag paper was implicated in meaning both mimetic and material. In fact, that dichotomy between material and content didn’t exist in the way we think of it today. I’ve done close readings of paper before, so the idea that materiality generates meaning was nothing new to me. But I always premised these on a false binary between the material and the content. I’d ask: “how does the page’s message complicate that of the content?”  Further, I always asked about why the printer decided to use a particular kind of paper, not who created the actual page. When confronted with physical labor, environmental impact, and material embodiment of paper’s construction, my grasp of that substrate we call “paper” was exploded. For the first time, I was confronted not just with the materiality of the page, but the material labor practices that are engrained in it. 

Analysis:

Fresh Press’s explosion of the hegemonic page is radical. The Fresh Press project’s return to the intimacies of paper in both product and process is vital for collective survival amid neoliberal climate crises. Following the end of the rag paper era, Senchyne writes “paper and paperwork became an expression of alienation from others rather than a scene of intimate presence with others” (Senchyne 158). Unlike rag paper, which paper makers created from their community’s clothing, wood pulp paper manufacturers create it from trees in far away forests and isolated mills. Senchyne suggests this change in material fundamentally altered the intimacies of the product, rendering invisible the systems of labor and lives engrained within it. Yet, the work at Fresh Press reintegrates paper, people, and environment. Just as rag paper was a community product/process, paper at Fresh Press comes from local agricultural waste.  Much like the production of rag paper rested on relationships between people and paper makers, the very story of Fresh Press’s foundation is dependent on human connection. Eric Benson’s relationships with farmers enabled him to coordinate using agricultural waste for paper making. Perhaps, if Eric didn’t know any farmers, he wouldn’t have known there was a plethora of agricultural waste, and Fresh Press never would have been imagined. These sustainable solutions Benson explores at Fresh Press rely on fostering relationships between people rather than alienating them from the process. 
The work at Fresh Press, thus, reinscribes the people in the paper by making visible the networks of production. In doing so, it reminds me as a literary scholar (granted a pretty unorthodox one) that all paper—rag, wood, and prairie—is both portrait and landscape. It’s portrait in the sense that it reflects the laborers who made it. It’s landscape in the sense that it is made of fibers that grow from the ground. The questions I could ask of the seemingly invisible page are endless. From what was it made? Where did that product grow? Who extracted it from the soil? For whom did they work? Where was that fiber turned to pulp and then paper? By whom? Meaning is always already inscribed long before the printer presses signifiers to the page. If literary scholars were to look beyond the text, the meanings they might reveal would be endlessly fascinating. 

Beyond Fibers: 

Of courses, not all paper is made of fiber. Increasingly more digital tablets aspire to have a paper-like feel or mimic the affordances of the page. The reMarkable 2 tablet is a noteworthy example. 
The reMarkable 2 tablet is premised on the assumption that paper is the ultimate technology for thinking. Unlike other tablets that facilitate a handwriting experience, the reMarkable 2 is designed solely for that purpose. It is not connected to the internet, except through a server to upload your work to. As such, its creators claim it simulates the “distraction free” experience of writing with an ink pen on a piece of paper while incorporating the affordances of the limitless digital page. When I first read about the remarkable, I thought it was silly. I asked myself, “why on earth would anyone spend hundreds of dollars for a tablet that could only do two things?” My classmates’ discussion made me reconsider my position. They brought up that digital technologies are designed for an attention economy. Tablets, like laptops and smart phones, lend themselves to multitasking, impulsivity, and infinite consumption. While it’s true you could turn off the internet on your device and use it much like the remarkable, distraction is always looming. reMarkable 2 does, indeed, eliminate that while ensuring that distraction free media can be easily connected—networked—to other media in the digital universe. Oddly it’s limitations—lack of internet connection, lack of applications, etc.—are its affordances. While the price tag is astronomical, and I’d never be able to justify buying one for myself, I left class with an appreciation for the reMarkable 2 and its ability to simulate the insularity of the pen and paper composing experience while connecting composition work to the cloud. I think that is valuable. 
And yet, I’m not interested in debating what the reMarkable 2 does well. I’m more concerned with addressing the assumption about paper upon which it’s constructed: that paper is an insular, self-contained substance. The creators of reMarkable 2 went through great lengths to manufacture a digital technology that mimicked the sensuality of the page. The company claims their tablet looks like, feels like, and sounds like wood pulp paper. Yet, even as the inventors simulate the materiality of the page, they insist it is devoid of meaning. ReMarkable 2 claims its innovation is creating a digital tablet that, like paper, contains “no distractions, just you and your thoughts” (reMarkable 2). Allegedly, paper—unlike networked media—is the ultimate thinking tool because it is “self effacing” (Senchyne 1). Because paper supposedly contains no meaning, it “dissolves” during the process of its use, so that all that is left is a perfect fusion of “just you and your thoughts” (Senchyne). In this way, the creators of reMarkable 2’s beliefs about paper are rooted firmly in hegemonic assumptions about the post-rag era: that paper is immaterial and without meaning. 
What if, in the spirit of Fresh Press and Jonathan Senchyne, we were to challenge these assumptions and think of paper, itself, as a networked technology? What if we were to look beyond ourselves and our thoughts at the actual substance? We would find that like paper, the reMarkable 2 is not just its user and their thoughts. Its aluminum frame may be a fragment of an Indonesian landscape. Its processor could be a sliver of the Xinjiang desert. Likewise, the remarkable is a portrait of the miners who labored (some forcibly) to extract those elements from the landscape. It’s an image of the factory employees who worked for long hours assembling the metal into pieces and parts to construct the tablet. Paper of any kind is never just its user and their thoughts. Paper, digital or otherwise, is always already a networked technology of portraits and landscapes. 


