What is format? In my typical day to day usage, when I say “format” I’m usually talking about 
rendering textual data in a way that conforms to a citation style. However, the word
format comes from the latin formarus liber, meaning to shape a book. This week’s readings concerned themselves with the ways in which digital formats may uniquely—or not that uniquely—shape the digital book. 

According to Dennis Tenen, the format of a book determines the channels of its distribution while "platforms facilitate the transition from thought to thing." (Tenen 7). In the case of a kindle ebook, the format is the underlying file you purchase from the Amazon kindle store. The platform required to use it is an ereader or ereader app. In the era of electronic books, “where books represent any number of such linked configurations, the book as platform fixes a specific stack of social, technological, and symbolic commitments into a rigid chain" (Tenen 7). You cannot print an Amazon kindle book and read it on paper. Rather, you must download Amazon’s ereader software to access the format. 

Uzanne, Ortega, and Osborn’s work on how different digital formats change the aesthetic, commercial viability, and preservation (respectively) of the electronic book confirm Tenen’s observations. Writing in 1894, Octave Uzanne predicts the rise of electronic books in the form of the audio book. He suggests that this change in format will fundamentally alter the form of the book: “little by little the taste for style and for pompously decorated phrases will die away, but the art of utterance will take on unheard of importance” (Uzanne 225). Likewise, digital platforms shape commercial possibilities. Ortega’s “The Many Books of the Future” highlights the dependencies of hybrid print and electronically formatted books on often obsolescent platforms to read them. Interesting, because binding media like that which they study, has failed to carve out a place for itself in the market because of how quickly these formats become unreadable by contemporary technology. As such, the titles do not present as strong front list or back list titles. The ecologies of neoliberal publishing make binding books financially unviable and therefore limit their creation. The Library of Congress’s Sustainability of Digital Formats projects is founded on this basis that digital media’s formats are often dependent on platforms that obsolesce. The project catalogs these formats and the platforms they depend upon to ensure their contents sustainability. 

It seems to me that Tenen is correct to suggest there is something unique about the extent to which the book as platform is dependent on proprietary technologies to enable its signification, but I wonder if there are analog platforms that function similarly. Tyler Shoemaker’s article points to continuities between error messages of the linotype and OCR eras.  He suggests that “if, with word processing, as Friedrich Kittler once remarked, ‘we simply no longer know what our writing is doing,’ the Linotype is a wedge in the beginnings of this rift, one that stretches into present-day systems where machine readers read and write text on our behalf" (Shoemaker 156). The linotype, I would argue, is still a digital technology, but not a computational one. Yet, Shoemaker’s and certainly Uzanne’s work suggests that book as format traverses the pre and post computer era, so can the same be said of the book as platform? What if we were to think of linotype, gramophone, and codex as platforms? What might be gained? What might this occlude? 
