  Kessler and Alpert’s pieces explore the many meanings and power dynamics ascribed to the written word at colonial encounter in the Americas.  Linc Kesler’s 2021 essay addresses the severely understudied relationship between Indigenous Americans, European settler colonization, and the written word.  Residential schools "replaced children’s connections to their communities with basic training in reading, writing, Christianity, and English in preparation for a subordinated position in an uncaring mainstream culture, while eroding the communities’ ability to resist further encroachment" (Kesler). Hannah Alpert-Abrams’ “Archaeology of a Book” is also interested in printed books at the moment European-Indigenous American colonial encounter, although she uses Advertencias to tell a more nuanced social history using bibliographic methodologies in which colonized and enslaved people are collaborators in textual production. 

  Yet, both authors assume that Indigenous American societies were oral. Kessler explicitly sets up the dichotomy between oral and literary cultures at the center of their essay. Alpert-Abrams’ project is a companion piece to the “primeros libros” archive—a collection of the “first books” in the Americas. While Alpert-Abrams is careful to only refer to the collection’s contents as the Americas’ “first print books,” the credence placed on “book” as a written form is evident.  Alpert-Abrams and Kessler’s interest in the shift from non-written to written cultures occludes other Indigenous traditions that lie somewhere between the oral and the manuscript such as khipu knots. Functionally, khipu provided a means of asynchronous communication. Khipu’s ability to carry information only the Incas could read was so threatening to the Spanish that they outlawed them by the 16th century (Borsuk 32). 

  I think these author’s assumptions are tied up in (pardon the pun) the elevation of print in our popular imaginary. We assume that print is “fixed, easily replicated, [and] identical in mass quantities” and lends itself to “a kind of referential purity” only a printer can press into a page (Werner; Kessler). Yet, when we look to other forms of recorded communication, does this thesis hold up? And if not, why has it taken root? 
