There is no object more closely associated with hegemonic book history than the codex, but second to it is the printing press. Yet, all of the authors of this week’s readings remove the printing press and “print culture” from its cultural pedestal and place particular printed objects within their own contexts to reveal the sociopolitical, economic networks that created them. 

Hegemonic understandings of “print culture” depict the printing press as an agent of change, ripping it out its many sociological contexts. Elyse Graham asks why, in particular, we turn to the rise of the printing press as our standard analogy for ground breaking technological discoveries. Drawing from philosopher Leo Marx’s work on technology, she suggests the printing press metaphor signifies seismic, groundbreaking technological progress inherent to our understanding of modernity. These metaphors are wholly inaccurate on two fronts 1) they aren't based in the actual history of print in Western Europe, and 2) technology is never on its own revolutionary. Rather, the printing press metaphor responds to market pressure in the academy and Silicon valley alike. Lisa Gitelman shows how print culture—having been ripped out of its material reality—does not account for the multiplicities of print shops and the cultures they foster outside of the printed codex. According to Gitelman, “print has become defined—as if in reflexive recourse to its own back-formation—by dint of ‘a negative relation to the [writer’s] hand’” so much so that “the printer’s hand has gone missing” (Gitelman). A unified thing we call print culture rests on severing the printing press from the printer. Put differently, “print culture” only makes sense as a coherent thing outside of its material, sociological reality. When embedded in it, print culture is not singular, it’s multiple. 

Werner and Sharren, Ozmet, and Levy study print as a material embodied phenomenon.
Sara Werner addresses the mechanics of the printing press and type. As opposed to studying print writ large as meaningful in and of itself, Werner suggests that close attention to the materiality of printed books can tell stories of the printing trade/a particular printer. Likewise, Kandice Sharren, Kate Ozment, and Michelle Levy describe how the WPHP uses the affordances of a relational database to reimagine how bibliography can create a sociology of texts to reveal webs of feminized actors in the long 18th century book trade. They break from more traditional modes of bibliography that describe, enumerate, and analyze texts to “[emphasize] that when digital bibliographers engage with the sociology of the text, we are studying books as embodied productions rather than solely material objects that can be reduced to formulas and measurements” (904). Print, for these authors, is not an amorphous phenomenon; it is grounded in the bodies of the people who created a printed object. 

Many studies of book history are interested in print above all else, but Charles Chesnutt’s short story, “Baxter’s Procrustes” recenters the value of the work of the binder and paper maker while others re-invisibilize it.  Sharren, Ozmet, and Levy’s WPHP, for example, includes books written, edited, printed, and sold by feminized subjects. They exclude books bound by women as well as those containing paper made by them. This is almost certainly for practical reasons. Binders did not put their names in books because sheets were often sold unbound and taken to the binder thereafter. Likewise, paper may be impressed with the name of the manufacturer, but not the individual laborers who created it much less that rag pickers and rag contributors. Nevertheless, it is likely every book made in the long 18th century had a woman contributor of some kind, whether her name was recorded or not (see Senchyne). In his “Baxter’s Procrustes,” Charles Chesnutt hilariously decenters printer and author. In the short story, the members of the Bodelian club commission their fellow member and Harvard graduate, Baxter, to publish a book of his poetry. Baxter takes care to commission the finest paper makers and binders. But knowing that his fellow rare book collectors would not open the book to maintain its value, he does not bother to finish writing his poem or have anything printed in it. While the members eventually realize Baxter’s book contains no text—only after spending a ridiculous amount of money on it—the book still becomes the most value work the club ever published. This is based on its rarity and also the fineness of its design. Indeed, print and characters are not inherently valuable. It is the stories of their production and consumption that accrue meaning. 
