Jonathan Senchyne and Lisa Gitelman both suggest a message’s material form is inextricable from the content itself. Senchyne shows how 17th through 19th century U.S. rag paper’s bibliographic (material) and linguistic (content/textual) forms created meaning and presence. For example, in his fourth chapter, Senchyne analyzes how contemporary authors racialized types of paper based on whiteness and how reading taught readers to differentiate text and human bodies on the basis of color: “whiteness, in both paper and persons, recedes and produces blackness, in both ink and persons, as the visible and visibly differentiated” (Senchyne 127). The bibliographic, paper and ink, and linguistic, language of difference, create each other. Likewise, Lisa Gitelman’s analysis of the PDF reveals that the software created a non-editable, digital, non-interactive form of reading documents specific to corporate authorship. Corporate authorship promotes hierarchized, dictatorial forms of communication. The PDF created a new form of document and afforded it meaning both through the corporate speak it may contain (linguistic code) and the fixity its digital infrastructure imposes (bibliographic code). In both cases, meaning—the message an object conveys—and material—that from which the thing is made—are mutually constitutive of presence, or what the thing actually does. Yet, at some point after the rag era and before the rise of the PDF, material and content, bibliographic and linguistic codes, meaning and matter, became epistemologically distinct. 

Amaranth Borsuk suggests "the legal shift to conceiving of the book as content, rather than object, is virtually inseparable from its commodification." Borsuk is specifically interested in the copyright era. Copyright laws required courts to differentiate between the content of a book and the object itself to sell rights to the same content in different mediums (Borsuk 98). Senchyne agrees that content and object separate in the 19th century, but he argues this has more to do with the advent of wood and vegetable pulp paper making that did away with the communal project of rag collecting. Whether the cause be material, technological, juridical, or economic, today we think of surface and inscription as separate domains. Epistemological separation has ontological ramifications that Fresh Press’s project may counter. When we think of material and message as distinct things and fail to comprehend the ontic presence of the page, the ecological consequences of its creation feel at best distant and at worst unimaginable. Fresh Press’s commitment to making sustainable paper products out of local agricultural waste reframes paper production as a local, collective project. 
